# Zoo-Monitor
In the field of information technology, we are asked to resolve problems utilizing effective methods, tools and software skills. In October of 2016, I developed a small Java-based application which I feel does a good job of encompassing and demonstrating this type of problem resolution. The given scenario was that zookeepers need to know the activities of the animals in their care and they also need to maintain their living habitats. A monitoring system was created which used a graphical menu system to let zoo keepers choose the different animals and habitats they wished to observe. The menus were dynamically built utilizing data from flat files. The information about each animal and habitat, including alerts for the zookeeper when the monitor detected something out of normal range, was also gathered from the flat files.
 

While this application is relatively concise, it incorporates many important concepts related to IT-based problem solving. The program is a logical multi-tier application which contains a simple front-end user interface (UI), business logic, and a back-end data store in the form of flat data files. This program demonstrates the utilization of essential object-oriented analysis and programming techniques. Java programming skills are demonstrated in the development of both the animal and habitat classes, which contain the required attributes and methods. These classes are used to instantiate their respective objects. Another important concept the code shows is the utilization of application programmer interfaces (API). The simple, yet easy to use, user interface was developed using the Swing Java library, which is a part of the Java Foundation Classes API. Another API used by the artifact is the Java IO library, which allows for the reading and manipulation of data from the flat files. The application was built using an integrated development environment (IDE). In this case I used a free IDE called Net Beans. This tool helps developers by ensuring code syntax, it contains debugging functionality to assist with logic errors, and it allows for easy code compilation and linkage.
 

During the creation of this application, I gained knowledge in several areas. I had never utilized Java Swing before, so that was a new experience. Normally, in the real world, I write more complex user interfaces utilizing tools like HTML, CSS and some form of JavaScript for web-based business applications. This skill set is good for small applications like this one that don't need to run in a browser. I also gained new insight on file manipulation using Java. Utilizing a scanner object with file streams was new to me. I had written similar code for file manipulation in the past, but that was with C programming, not Java. An artifact like this application helped to set me up for success in the real world by demonstrating what a business application can be on a smaller scale. Even big, distributed systems in business today have a front-end user interface, a middle-tier for business logic and back-end data store. The technology stack may be different, but there is an analogous abstract view. Instead of Java Swing, the real-world application may be built using browser based technology. Instead of a single java file controlling the application, the business application may have the business logic and controllers on multiple servers. Finally, instead of flat files on a single disk, the data store may consist of a heavy weight relational database like Oracle on a dedicated DB server. While the hardware and software may change, the concepts are the same.
